Walter, how do we pronounce your last name correctly?
Portsheimer.
In your notes, you'll have to distinguish between father, who is Walter, and I, who am Walter L. I've got the middle initial, which I hate.
So you'd prefer that I don't use it then?
Well, if you've got to distinguish between father and me, you've got to use something.
Okay.
All right, what do you want to know?
Well, I understand that when you were twenty-one years old, your father made quite an extraordinary gift to you, a gift of books.
That's how Yale gets started.
Is that right?
Gifted books.
Yeah.
That's how Harvard gets started, I guess.
Not nearly as normal.
But John Harvard gave some books, I guess, now.
Well, we'll get to that in a minute.
Let me give you the background of how I got into this.
All right.
As I say, I came from a family of book collectors.
There were four brothers, three of whom
Carl, Arthur, and my father, all involved in rare books in one way or another.
Carl—well, Carl and father both started their libraries about 1920, right after World War I. Arthur had always been a student.
He'd studied abroad.
studied at home, he'd always been a student, hated Wall Street.
And ultimately, when Carl H. Fortzheimer and the company broke up at twenty-five or twenty-six, Arthur and my father left the firm.
And ultimately, Arthur went in and set up his own rare book business.
Really?
Not a great success, but I'm very devoted to his memory because when he and Father were together, he would always ask what I was studying in that particular timeframe in likely literature or history.
And your father would say, well, they're studying Shakespeare.
A large and very top-flight biography of Shakespeare would
end up at my desk the next day.
He was interested in young people, and I was interested in reading.
I read way ahead of my class, which almost drew on my education because they kept skipping the ed and grades because of my reading ability.
As a result, I never learned arithmetic or fractions very well.
Can't add or subtract now.
You weren't a native Washingtonian, by the way.
No.
We should point that out.
The family grew up— Grew up in Purchase, New York.
Yes, sir.
But my Uncle Isaac, who had some small collections of great delicacy and choice, was a great influence on me.
And I remember there were days when, as a little boy, he would take me around to rare bookstores, and when he was going around looking for things for himself, he'd always buy me something.
I'd have around this room somewhere, as his first book I recall, he bought me in the rare book field from a very well-known dealer in New York named James Drake.
So that's one influence.
Carl Sr.
had no impact on me.
After all, I was ten years old about, or eleven when the firm broke out, so I knew him only as an uncle.
Was this an amicable separation of the family?
No, no.
No.
No, it wasn't at all.
That was the two wives.
Oh, I don't want to say that.
Uh, no, no.
Whenever you don't want me to use something, just say it, by the way, and, uh... Well, I literally, uh... And we don't have to go into any detail of this, but I was just curious.
Well, Carl and my father literally, except under what circumstances, never taught.
I mean, if they were in a room together, for some reason,
Bad blood, in other words.
Dead head drops in corners.
And then Carl, of course, formed the great Fortheimer Library, now at the University of Texas.
Are you pleased, by the way, that I went to Texas?
Well, I think the whole thing was probably mismanaged almost from scratch.
But Carl, and particularly his wife,
had a great ego.
They never wanted to give anything unless their name was on it in lights.
So that he was somewhat limited, strangely enough, where this great library could go.
New York Public, where he sat on the board, it would have been duplicated 40, 50 percent.
Harvard, where Carl Julia went, they weren't going to build him a building.
He wanted to be sure of the lights through over the door and said, this is the Kyle Fortzheimer Library gift of.
Texas will do that for you, by the way.
That's better.
Texas might, but of course, Kyle's long gone.
Now, when you say the Kyle Fortzheimer Library went to the University of Texas, you're talking about the books involved in the so-called famous Fortzheimer catalog, which takes you up to about 1800.
This is the catalog Bill Jackson did, three volumes.
very scarce, hard-to-get items.
Bradley Martin had a set that went for big bucks.
I haven't seen Bradley's prices on those.
But from 1800 on is another matter with Carl.
Carl had the best, probably the best Shelley collection outside of the British Library.
There were seventy-odd
Shelly manuscripts, all the first editions, notebooks, letters of Shelly's family, Father Mary Walter.
It's the biggest thing outside the British Library.
Where did it go?
And that, along with what Byron and Keatsy had in that period, Shelly and his circle is what they call it, is now in New York Public.
I don't know.
I just don't know.
It's well known in the press, and I just don't have it anymore.
I'll find it.
So that part of the library is in New York Public.
Now, my father decided he was going to collect books.
He wasn't going into the English literature business, because
Carl had that spread.
They had no sense they were competing against each other for a first polio.
But then again, if they didn't like each other, why not?
My father always had a motto, never get in a sniffing match with a skunk.
My mother, who had a very strong Francophile lead,
So Father decided to go into the French field, and in particular, Molière.
But did he like French stuff, personally?
He knew his books.
He didn't know Molière gravel as an English book.
But I mean, this seemed to be a fertile area for him to collect.
Yes, that is true.
Not so much that it represented the love of his, the passion of his.
Well, this goes back to a story also, I might tell you.
That
At the turn after World War I, there was a very famous bookseller, probably the most famous at the time, in this country named George Smith.
George D. And George Smith, whom I barely remember meeting once or twice as a little boy when he'd come to purchase, George Smith
took an option on the Schumann collection in Paris.
I think it was a French collection.
And I think it's S-C-H-U-H-M-A-N-N, Schumann.
was bringing over to the States what would have been the greatest French collection ever sold in America.
When, to his horror and surprise, he died, unexpectedly.
The Schumann collection thus really became available, and
A rising young bookseller in New York named Rosenbach.
Young Rosenbach, who was just trying to build up his reputation, and you'll see this in Ed Wills' book, needed $12,000 to take an auction on the Schumelin collection.
which Carl and my father put up, although in the version Ed Wolfe has, my father doesn't appear as one of those who did put up.
Ed's got a couple of errors in that book.
Well, everything goes to Carl on that.
But Ed got his story from Carl, I'm sure, and father doesn't appear.
And remember the difference between Carl and my father.
My father would die at even the mention of his name if he gave a $5 gift to charity or a $5,000 gift to charity.
His name was never on.
It was always anonymous.
He was very shy.
He was very different from me.
He'd go for a day almost without saying anything.
Very quiet.
Sensitive.
Lovely guy.
And
I saw a person that wouldn't let his name get forward in a book about Rosenbach purchasing the Schumann Collection, although his name does appear, because the loan of the twelve grand was to be taken out in trade out of the sale of the collection.
So there are books in here from the Schumann Library collection.
A couple of them I've already given to Yale, actually.
And Father was beginning to orient on the French, even that far back.
And he had two prongs to that collection.
The Royal French Bindings, of which Meijon Foote may have mentioned something.
Which are these things over here, the Royal French, behind it.
And then the Molière collection, which I guess is probably the best Molière collection in private hands in this country, is that young cover there.
The whole wall there?
Most of it.
How many volumes are part of that?
Well, I think there are about 10,000 volumes adhered.
Wow.
I mean, in the Moyer collection?
No.
I don't know.
Ten thousand volumes in the library.
Of which over five are the intelligence service collections.
So between the Moyer and the Bindings, and a lot of books I've given away now, the reading libraries of one sort and another.
That runs about five feet.
In any event, Father built the Monier Collection.
One reason it looks small to you here, around on the back corner are about twenty shelves of reference material from the seventeenth-century on.
Father used to tell me that there wasn't any point—you know, it's way in back.
Father used to tell me there wasn't any point in having a collection of first editions
if you didn't have a reference collection to back it up and tell you things.
And so there are about twenty shelves of reference material.
And I do try to keep that up, up to a certain extent, when I go abroad every other year or so, and buy the newest French reference books.
Or there's one very good dealer I use over there who
because the catalog won't strike a year, and I buy quite a bit from him.
Perez?
And, uh, no.
I saw him with a Bradley Martin, an interesting character.
Yeah.
A character.
I know nothing about him except that I saw him with a shawl around, a red shawl.
No, no comment.
Okay.
Just thought I'd see if I could get a little... No comment.
...get a little rise out of the water in there.
No.
As a little boy in prep school, and then on to my first years in college at Yale, my father had about three volumes by an American author named Frank R. Stockton.
Now, Frank Stockton, a generation or two before your time, was a very popular American author in the latter part of the 19th century.
particularly well-known for one short story he wrote called The Lady of the Tiger, which you all have to read and study for college boards.
The three or four volumes of Stockton that Father had on his shelves, I liked, I read them, enjoyed them, and began buying some more Stockton.
And you could get a first donation for fifty cents or a buck, but you're not twice as you're seventy-five.
Where'd you go?
Where'd you look?
Oh, the antiquarian row.
The antiquarian row.
He showed you something like that down Fourth Avenue.
Fourth Avenue.
Anyway, I began to build a stocking collection.
And today it is the definitive collection of Frank Hart Stockton, because we brought the family out.
We meaning you.
We're probably right.
I had a birthday about one for a month.
And so in those ranges back there is the definitive collection of Stocktoniana, all the first editions.
starting with his first book inscribed to his mother.
Many of the manuscripts, the original manuscripts, although there Stockton had very serious eye trouble, gave him a serious headache to read or write, so he had to dictate if he read two books of the time.
So most of these manuscripts are not in his own autograph, but
A long book manuscript is completely in his own hand, and that is here.
And some short stories that he managed to write— Are they typescripts, or are they somebody else's hologram?
Well, this is in his own hand, and some stories are in his own hand.
The rest are either his wife or his sister.
It wasn't until quite late that his correspondence were going to be in typed for him.
Most of the letters—
of his correspondence with his publishers in here, and the original drawings in here.
I don't know the writer.
How does he rate today?
Not rate, rate something.
How does he endure?
I don't take high school English anymore, but I suppose they might get the Lady of the Tiger thrown at them.
Outside of that, no.
But nevertheless, evaluate the importance of the collection.
Well, the importance of the collection is simply a—at his time, probably the third most popular American author in the latter part of the 19th century, behind Mark Twain and William Dean Howells.
So that's certainly— And I have his cash book of royalties here, which would show that for those times he got
He also very kindly kept a notebook in which he wrote down the title of everything he ever wrote, when he started writing it, when he completed it, to whom he sold it, and for how much, and where the serial rights went.
Well, that's very useful then, isn't it?
It is very useful.
My father kept saying with tears in his eyes, I wish it were Shakespeare.
But it's interesting as a study of that period.
Yeah, certainly.
Of publishing as well as writing, I mean.
That's right.
And the original drawings are here.
Charles David Gibson, A.B.
Frost.
That's good.
First-class illustrator.
That's amazing.
There is a big collection of letters from Stockton to Frost.
I hate to jump ahead, but what do you plan to do with that collection?
That goes to Yale.
Everything does to Yale.
Including my ashes, if they want them.
But one of the interesting points about that collection is that—well, I've forgotten the point I was going to make.
We're talking about the significance of the... Yeah.
It fits into that period in the 19th century where you had major magazines like Century and Harper's and so forth where these things were serialized.
Good illustrators were employed to illustrate them.
But the important thing I was going to mention is that
Stockton was a prolific correspondent.
So I said to some surviving members of the Stockton family once, well, gosh, aren't there a lot of letters to Frank Stockton?
Oh, yes, they said, there was a trunk or two full of them.
But at the end of World War I, we got so tired of carrying them around, we hurt them.
I said, well, what there?
letters from people like Mark Twain.
Oh, yes, they said, we remember those because we cut the autographs off before we burnt the letters.
So that half of the correspondence, except for about 21 letters that I got from another member of the Stockton family who gave them to me, are gone.
Where do you feel when you hear something like that?
Well, you just lost another friend, that's all.
Well, the point of talking about the Stockton Collection and
And the fact is, my father's library door was always open to me because he saw that I knew how to handle books and liked to be in the library.
And on my 21st birthday, he also saw that I was pretty well hooked in the rare book end of things.
He said, well, son, you don't need another car.
I'll give you the library for your 21st birthday, and here it is.
The whole library?
The whole library.
That must have knocked you on your butt.
How come you can't touch it or something?
Surprised.
Well, what was your reaction?
Thank you very much.
I was grateful.
And it just doubled my own load of— But it's a pretty resonant gift, isn't it?
Yeah.
I mean, it's something that has—
Yeah, I mean, you know, you lived with it at that time.
I'd lived with it for twenty-one years, but it was a shocker, really.
Well, did it stay where it was?
Stay where it was, yeah.
But it became yours, obviously, I guess.
That's right.
I must confess that I have done very little with the binding collection of royal French bindings.
That is an art form.
If you're going to collect rare bindings, you're going to collect rare bindings, and then you just simply drive at it.
There are a few very good ones here, including one of the famous Broglie bindings, which Yale is still salivating to get, although they
have one from the melancholy.
I think, in some ways, this is a better binding.
Can you just point to it?
No, it's in a song or change.
No problem.
So I don't do anything with the bindings.
I just can't with the other tasks I have at the moment.
This is particularly useful because you get the typical Grunier geometric pattern with his motto for John Grunier and his friends.
But the enamel has stayed in remarkably good shape.
That's exquisite.
Or a bookmarked in about 1580 or something.
And we have on it Saxonia, S-A-X-O-N-I-A.
Yeah, this is Albert Franz's volume on Saxonia.
Well, they just kind of just write it down so I can... Let me shut this off a second.
The condition of the enamel.
Well, this is not quite a folio size.
That would be a folio size?
Come on.
That's nice.
Thank you.
Well, Miriam would never forgive me if I didn't show you that.
Yeah.
Well, this is—when I was at the Peeps Library, they let me handle the diary.
That was kind of nice, too.
Here you now have the genesis of Walter Elfworth's hammer.
Now, on the money era, there were some gaps—a few, very few gaps—that I have been able to fill, particularly in what you call the ballet that Father didn't have.
My father built this French collection with the help of the greatest expert in progress, perhaps, a legendary figure and a wonderful gentleman named Seymour de Ritchie.
I remember the first time I met de Ritchie, I was, I think, about nine years old.
I just finished reading his book on English book collectors.
My father had some business to transact, and he was a nine-year-old boy.
You had to sort of sit down and keep him quiet or happy.
And so Gerritchie asked me if I liked stamps, and I said yes.
So he brought down several volumes of his stamp collection.
It's the most beautiful stamp collection you ever saw.
And when he and Father were finished and we were leaving, he said, well, now I want it.
Did you like the staff collection?"
This is your father speaking, or the Richie?
No, the Richie Domaine asked me whether I liked the staff.
And I said, oh, they were wonderful.
He said, you know, every staff in that collection is a forgery.
Wow.
The man was, had a mind, a memory.
That's a nice story.
Yeah, it's a nice story.
I remember you'd ask him about some very obscure book, and he'd say, well, in 1903, I was in Mr. So-and-so's library, and he had a copy of that book.
It was on the third shelf, fifth book in from the wall.
And this would be 50 years later.
He's a very fascinating man to Ritchie.
Fascinating.
Yeah.
Now, he came to this country several times, of course.
My father was as good a friend as he had in this country.
And he was working on the census of medieval manuscripts for the Library of Congress.
What did he have?
I missed it.
I got him.
No, he got away from you.
You got him?
Eat him.
There he is right there.
Okay.
What did they call that?
Census of... Medieval and Renaissance Manuscripts.
in the United States and Canada.
And somewhere out in the Middle West, DeRitchie broke down.
He was hospitalized.
Until he was completely recovered, he spoke only in medieval Latin.
They finally brought him east for more hospitalization.
My father met the train.
He didn't recognize my father, but he naturally recovered.
And he finally died in Paris during the war about 1944.
So I really never had the personal use of his
advice in anything I might have bought.
But we had another friend over there named Arthur Rau, R-A-U.
And Arthur Rau was the Paris representative of Max.
And he and Father were very good friends, and he and I became very good friends.
And I would never buy any mud air at all without Arthur passing on it.
because while I'd taken a course in bibliography at Yale, taught by the university librarian, I really am not practiced enough to—not to be fooled, perhaps, by some fine points.
And so I leaned very heavily on Arthur Rao for advice and a few things that I bought.
As a matter of fact,
One of the last things I bought in 1958 was one of over a half-dozen copies of the Money in Air Play .
David, I think—well, I've forgotten right now, but the title page is one of a half a dozen title pages dated a year before the usual
date which appears on the other editions of the play.
And my mother said, well, son, it's a little expensive.
Why don't I split the cost with you?
So I cost it in her safe deposit boxes.
I left that day for Europe.
And I returned to the States about an hour before she died.
Right.
I showed this to my dear friend, Fritz Liebert, the head of the Beinecke Library, the librarian of the Beinecke, one of the great rare book figures, scholars in this country.
In typical fashion, Fritz said,
The story you tell me, it's a marvelous memorial to your mother, and he put it in his pocket and put it back up the nail and put it in the library before I ever had it on my own shelf.
The thing is that I don't do much with Moliere.
There is a so-called definitive bibliography of Moliere.
I've checked it against my copies.
If I had nothing else to do, I'd redo the so-called definitive bibliography and correct it.
But at least it's annotated for Yale to fuss with when they get it.
It's an interesting collection.
For instance, that shelf, the last shelf of books on the left there, those are all British plays by famous playwrights we knew, Swift, Sharon Congreve, Leitcherly, and all that.
Now, why are they there?
They're all there because, in some part, each was stolen from a Moliere point.
That's nice.
That's a nice book.
And there are even books written about it.
But there they are.
And then you begin to go after the first and early editions.
You go into the first collected editions.
Who helped form that?
I mean, who advised that?
De Ritchie.
Yeah.
I mean, that's connoisseurship is what we're talking about.
Yeah, that's real connoisseurship.
And Father knew his books, too.
And with this collection, there is a huge collection of royal French autographs, which were quite fashionable in those days.
But occasionally you get a piece with some historical value in it, and they're all here.
How did your father come to work with de Ritchie?
I mean, I never knew how he met de Ritchie.
I don't remember if I ever did, though.
I mean, whoever directed him.
May have been George Smith.
But, I mean, you couldn't have asked for better.
Oh, no.
He's a very great actor.
It could have been George Smith, but I was too young, I don't know, to remember.
For instance.
DeRitchie designed our book plate.
That's your book plate?
Well, it started with Father M. Father's red, mine's blue.
Well, that's nice.
There are a lot of DeRitchie letters.
That's lovely.
So, all right.
Here I am, a nice, sweet, innocent, lovely boy collecting Frank Stockton.
Then I did what I was in law school, from 35 to 38.
Where did you go to law school?
I made a very small collection, I mean a very small collection, of books on copyright law.
And I had decided that if I was going to get involved with the law, I would get involved as a copyright lawman going out of the book collection, because of the early historical copyright cases.
They're all of great names in the field of scholarship writing.
And Yale was very good in training me up in this field.
And I formed this collection of books.
and stuff on copyright law, mostly 19th, 20th century.
Although there's a wonderful letter on international copyright I had from James Fenimore Cooper to his forematures, and from Washington Irving to someone.
A few of those things.
The American Antiquarian Society just this week got the definitive Cooper collection from the Cooper family—manuscripts, letters,
It hasn't been announced yet, but Mark will correct me.
How did they get that?
The Cooper family gave that all to Yale years ago.
When I get the press release, when I talk to Mark about it, it's a major, major James Monroe Cooper collection, which will affect Bart.
Cooper's a Yale man.
But Bart Auerbach, you know Bart in New York, he appraised it at $650,000.
Well, I would think he's one.
Cooper's a Yale man.
We kicked him out after a year or two.
But there is a tremendous Cooper collection at Yale, manuscripts and everything.
Well, you know what?
I want to find out.
It's interesting.
Yeah.
I'll let you know.
So tell me now, you went to law school.
I made this small copyright law collection.
That same material is just one of those acquisitions sort of things.
And I gave that to Yale Law School.
on my 25th anniversary graduation from law school, because I wasn't using it anymore and wasn't practicing law seriously anymore.
Tell me about the attraction to intelligence and government service and the building of what is a preeminent collection, from what I understand.
The preeminent collection.
Is that an unfair assessment of the collection?
The collection.
It is the collection.
Capital T, right?
Yeah.
Well, I'll tell you about it in a minute.
The thing is that the war came along, and I went into the—enlisted in the Army, because I had no right to stay out.
I had no family.
Did you get a commission?
And after basic training, I went to Officer Kennedy School and got a commission in the Air Force after OCS.
I went to Navy OCS myself.
And on the 8th of December, 1942, the day of our graduation from OCS, actually a week or two before that, an officer papped me on the shoulder.
He was very junior, I think, a lieutenant perhaps, maybe a captain, I doubt it.
I've never seen him before, I don't know his name, and I've never seen him since.
And he asked me whether I would be a minimal to going into intelligence.
And Mike said yes.
Mary?
Mr. Tepe on the shoulder and asked if you would be able to go into intelligence.
I didn't know all that much about the Air Force, except I knew I wasn't going to be flying airplanes.
But I said, sure, that sounded great.
You don't know how they picked you out?
Well, I don't know.
They were looking, among other things, for lawyers.
They were looking for lawyers, for archaeologists, for photo interpretation.
And so on the 8th of December— Analytical people, basically, I guess.
I mean, well, whatever.
I went into intelligence on that date, going off to the Air Intelligence School at Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
And I must say that I've been in intelligence service every day since then without a break.
Even now in retirement from the agency?
I'm lecturing at Defense Intelligence College once a week, conducting seminars, working on their bibliography.
I've just retired now almost a year ago as chairman of the Association of Former Intelligence Officers and the nationwide organization.
I sit on several intelligence boards.
And occasionally I'm still consoling in the old homestead out in Langley.
The career is one I must say that I have never regretted for a minute.
How much can you tell me about the kind of work that you did in intelligence?
Well, after hacking around the states, after coming out of OCS in the usual assistant squadron, intelligence officer assistance group, you know.
I eventually went to England in 1944, and after one very brief assignment there,
went on the intelligence staff of the senior air headquarters in Europe.
So you're still in the Army Air Corps, not with OSS or anything?
Never was with OSS.
Okay.
Back on.
Now, I was never in OSS, but I was involved in helping to set up an OSS operation
which utilized the so-called war collection of the Yale Library as a cover.
Really?
And without going into all the details, you'll find a whole chapter on it.
In that book.
In chapter three of a very, very good book by Professor Robin Winks.
Well, where are they all?
cloak and gown.
Okay, I'll get that at Harvard.
I do my archival.
What's next to her?
I'm sorry.
You must go slumber.
Anyway.
They don't have bad things there.
I'm honored to be a co-dedicate of Robin's book.
Oh, great.
I wonder why there were three copies of it there.
When was that published, by the way?
A couple years ago.
I don't think it's in the bibliography yet.
I'll get that in Worcester.
Okay, good.
Yeah.
Tomorrow I can see the publisher, too.
Okay, so chapter three.
Yeah, which is the Yale Library project.
There are lots of interesting—you on here?
Yep.
Yes, sir.
Oh, yeah.
There are a lot of interesting side stories about that project, which
just barely touches on.
But no one at Yale, except those handling the project, knew about it until it was blown by some writer in 1950, roughly.
And were they surprised.
And the money was channeled through me as a trustee of the library.
on behalf of myself and some fellow alumni.
How did you feel about that?
I thought it was fine.
If that's the way they wanted to do it, that's all right with me.
Because I left Roaster Yes two or three days after the thing had been set up, my father ran the accounts and books for the rest of the war.
He was cleared to be in the know on that.
project and ran the books.
All the documents and papers are up at Yale now.
And once in a while you get a chance even in wartime to collect.
You know, there are people who have books around that they aren't going to need anymore, and occasionally you tend to borrow one perhaps.
And that happened to me, yeah.
I was in a fellow's office, and I saw some books he didn't need.
I took five of them, actually.
Oh, my.
Oh, my goodness.
Well, he didn't need it anymore.
Ex Libris, Adolf Hitler.
Isn't it?
This is an inscription by Hitler?
No, that's the author, the great Peter.
Yeah, but it's got Hitler's book plate.
Yeah, to Hitler's.
Yeah, they inscribed the book and gave it to me.
This book comes out of Hitler's office.
K-A-M-T-F.
That's kind of battle.
How do we spell T-H-U-R-A-N-T.
A novel of the 13th century.
By Robert Palmers.
A-L-L-M-E-R, I'll say.
It was inscribed by the author to the Fuhrer in Berlin in March 1933.
Where'd you get this?
Very early on.
I took this out of Hitler's office in the Reichskanzlei in Berlin.
How'd you get into Hitler's office?
That's part of my job.
Then you figure what the hell made.
They were lying around.
What are you going to do?
He said, what are you going to do?
Leave him there.
I want that to get on the tape.
Surely I was in Gehring's place in Air Ministry, in the headquarters of Air Ministry.
And this is a phone book from the minister-president of the city of Berlin, which he was, General Field Marshal Gehring, of phone numbers from his office in Berlin.
Really?
to his home in Caron Hall in East Prussia.
And with some notes that he made, there's a piece of his stationery.
Now, I wouldn't touch this stuff if I thought he needed it anymore, but I knew he didn't.
So what can you do?
He was indisposed at the time.
Yeah.
I think about five of them.
I've got two of them left.
One's at Yale, I think.
A friend borrowed one in exchange for having sent me on temporary duty to Berlin.
And I gave one to somebody else.
Anyway, I guess maybe I gave one to the Gordier Club.
Five or six of them.
With Hitler's book plays?
Yeah.
They were great curiosities.
I guess.
It would have been nicer if we signed them.
No, no, no, I mean if Hitler had signed them.
You know, good Hitler signatures are hard to come by, because usually they use a rubber stand, a very good one.
But I do have one of the commissions to Albert Speer, with his Minister of Production, of course you'd want to call it in the end.
One of the commissions that Spear had and one of the jobs they did, signed by Hitler, and it's a good signature.
For real, very neurotic.
It's worth big bucks.
Hmm?
Hitler is worth a lot of money, and not that we should let money into this.
Well, sell it for what it cost me, which is zero.
But I knew if I didn't take it into custody, somebody else would misuse it.
I didn't want that to happen.
I think we're talking here about basically valueless things.
I mean— Unless you're a book collector.
Unless you're a book collector.
That's right.
I think we have to—I have to make this point.
Your nickel.
My nickel, okay.
Well, I come home, and in February of 46, I'm asked to join the newly established Central Intelligence Group, which at that point was about two weeks old.
the first deputy director of CIG, Kingman Douglas, Yale, 1918, I believe, who had been the senior air intelligence officer in British air ministry during the war, American air intelligence officer, in liaison in air ministry during the war, asked me to come in and help set up, and I did.
As I say, I've been in this game ever since, and I've never regretted it.
But what I found in CIG, particularly after about August of, from August of 46 on, was that I was surrounded, as it were, by a goodly number of veteran OSS officers.
I didn't know beans about OSS.
except for that project on health set up back in 1943.
What does the G mean in CIG, by the way?
Group.
Central Intelligence Group?
Yeah.
And one of the interesting things that happened, being a lawyer, I was the one person there who sort of
saw that there was going to be congressional interest in the group, and that the group would also have an interest in the Congress in getting appropriations and the like.
And one reason or another, I kept discussing this with the director and his executive officer, deputy.
And about August of 46, I became CIG's first legislative counsel.
And I was in that job for ten years, getting all their basic legislation through the Congress and handling all of their relations with the Congress.
Now, surrounded by all these folks from OSS, whether we're talking Dick Helms, Alan Dulles, people whose names aren't going to ring any bells,
I didn't know very much about it, and there were beginning to be a few books, even as early as 46, 47, about OSS in particular, or something of that order.
And I bought them, you know, at any bookstore.
I bought them.
I didn't ever mean to collect or anything.
But it was your profession now?
It was my profession.
These were my associates, and I'd better know something more about all it says than I did.
And so I read these things—magazine articles.
Goodwin said it.
And then some of my bookseller friends caught on to me and began shoving me back in time towards
books on intelligence in World War I and the Civil War.
And I remember Dave Randall, for instance, at Scribner's, later the librarian at the Lilly Library at the University of Indiana.
You were going up to the Lilly, by the way.
And Dave was a good friend of mine and always treated me very, very well, as many booksellers do to there.
You wrote an interesting book, by the way, Randall.
Yeah.
And old Dave sold me a book called Spy of the Rebellion by Alan Pinkerton.
Beautiful copy with that Pinkerton eye on the front cover over there.
Yeah, this is the Civil War.
Yeah.
So they got me back to the Civil War.
One day I was in New York.
Do you think, pardon me, but were they aware that they were building a collection?
No.
Neither was I. No way.
I had no intention of building a book.
But you were, though.
Get a book from the Civil War and WW1.
Come on.
Curiosity.
Okay.
I was up in New York.
Well, you brought these to read, then?
Yeah.
Okay.
One often does read books.
But I mean, you were buying them— I wasn't buying them as collections.
You were buying them as individuals?
No.
And so then, one day, I was up in New York.
I went by to see my old friend Bill McCarthy, who had been in the Rebel Room at Yale when I was a freshman and sophomore, then going on to the University of Texas Library under Fannie Ratchard.
and eventually ended up as one of the people at Rosenbach.
And I went in to see Bill.
I guess he asked me to come and see him for something.
What he had was a little document on an intelligence collection statement in the New York Revolution.
It wasn't much of a document, except today it has some significance in that it was signed by Jonathan Dayton, who is, I think, the only signer of the Constitution with intelligence experience direct.
And it was nothing to write home about.
It was a $35 document.
for a second.
No, that's not important.
It's just a little piece of paper.
I was just about to leave when McCarthy said to me, just a minute, he said, I think I have something here you might be interested in.
He laid on the table before me a letter
dated 1777 to Colonel Elias Dayton, who was Washington's intelligence chief in New Jersey.
And without going into great detail, this letter has a last paragraph on it, which is now quoted by, or misquoted by, countless people who are writing or talking.
And it reads,
The necessity of procuring good intelligence is apparent and need not be further urged.
All that remains for me to add is that you keep the whole matter as secret as possible.
For upon secrecy, success depends in most enterprises of the kind.
And for one of them,
They are generally defeated, however well planned and promising a favorable issue.
I am, sir, your most obedient servant, G. Washington.
Now, here's this thing laying on the green baize on the table in front of you.
This is about 1950.
Oh, my God.
And we're now, unfortunately, at what you call the make-or-break point.
Do you or don't you collect?
I had never started collecting books on intelligence qua collection until I was faced with this document.
And what do you do?
Well, there's no question of what you do.
You just cannot let something like that go by.
May I ask what it cost you?
Sure.
I will tell you.
Okay.
I never discuss Brides, normally.
G. Washington.
I'm just writing it down here.
The thing is— And to whom, by the way, once again was this— Colonel Elias, later Brigadier, Colonel Elias Dayton in New Jersey.
Congratulations, that's a wonderful document.
Well, that's a document.
What do you do?
Here it is, something like that.
That's an artifact, actually.
Yeah.
That actually sets the course, doesn't it?
I mean— If you're going to go.
I don't mean just for you, I mean also for the apparatus that follows.
Oh, heavens yes.
Yeah.
No, this document, which we've occasionally used on Capitol Hill— I would think.
That last paragraph, as Director of Central Intelligence, the great General Walter Beatle-Smith said— I've seen Washington things go at auction.
Yeah.
If you have some idea what that might fetch— Today?
Goodbye.
I mean, I happen to know.
I saw Washington's copy of the Federalist Papers sell for 1.5.
1.5, plus 10 percent.
Yeah, I saw it go, too.
That was not what I would go for in that sale.
I would have gone if I had money to play with, with that archive of 221 pieces with Lord Sterling.
That was nice stuff.
Because this letter is about Lord Sterling's division.
Who got that, do you know?
Who secured that?
No, I don't know.
I think it's in the press.
It's in the newspaper.
It didn't impress me one way or the other.
I think it was a dealer, actually, in an undisclosed or whatever.
Yeah.
So you got it.
You got it, obviously.
Obviously I got it.
And you are now committed.
Now I am committed.
Did you walk out of there knowing you were committed?
I don't remember.
Prior to that day, you had a library of a very interesting resource material.
When you walked out of that office— Not an intelligence.
But you had been gathering materials.
Well, let's say I had done books.
But now you had— Now you're in deep, deep trouble.
And taken a collection.
What President Bush calls the deep doo-doo.
I remember being in Vice President Bush's office once, and I'd worked with him out at the agency.
And after we'd finished talking about what he wanted to talk to me about, I quoted this last paragraph to him, which he'd never heard.
By the way, I'd like the record to show that you did that from memory.
I always did that one from memory.
You really didn't.
You have the copy of the letter in your lap, but you did it from memory.
I did.
And I quoted that last paragraph to it.
I had guessed something, and I happened to have it in my briefcase, and I showed it to him.
You carried that out there?
Oh, no.
To the way I described it.
I think so, yeah.
But he was so excited.
I mean, he shot out of his chair and took it out and showed it to his colleagues in the vice president's office.
You can have a lot of trouble with something like that.
Where again did you get this, by the way, from home?
Rosenbach.
This was Rosenbach.
From Bill McCarthy.
Rosenbach was working for... McCarthy was working for Fleming.